hey guys welcome back to the channel so
you probably know that the conjuring
movies are one of the biggest horror
film franchises today with another entry
just released
now the first movie has a lot of well
executed scary moments however there's
always this
lingering sense of unease even when
there's not a lot happening on screen
sometimes it's just the parent family
walking around the house or the warren's
driving somewhere
yet you can always feel that something
is slightly off and there are actually a
lot of sudden things going on which you
might not even notice
and are almost hidden which secretly
make the movie a lot creepier
so let's look at the horror that you
don't see in the conjuring
just as a really quick reminder in the
movie we follow the parent family as
they move into a new house
and they slowly begin to feel that
something is not quite right
are awful smells it's always really cold
and all of the clocks stop at 307
am every single night a few days go by
and their fears are confirmed when they
experience various demonic attacks
so they get help from two paranormal
experts the husband and wife team of
eden lorraine warren who do the best
they can to get the parents life back to
normal
and if you've seen the movie you
probably know that there are a few
shots that just look a little bit odd
they make you uncomfortable and it's
hard to tell
why it's not like there's a ghost
walking through the frame or anything
and i kept re-watching some of these
parts over and over again
because they always made me uneasy the
first one i looked at was the second
time that the warrens drive to the house
so far they've determined that there's
an evil spirit in this place that has
latched itself onto the parent family
and now the warrens must gather evidence
to authorize an exorcism on the house
and again this shot just feels off in
some way so eventually i took some
markers and started taping off the edges
of the house
and even though they're driving towards
it as we can see by the trees moving by
the edges
the house is actually getting smaller
this is called a dolly zoom it's an
effect you get by pushing the camera in
and simultaneously zooming out and vice
versa
and there are great examples of this in
jaws or lord of the rings where they're
really obvious
but here it's much slower and this
effect commonly evokes a feeling of
uneasiness since it looks like there is
this stretching and shrinking of
distances
that should remain the same it simply
looks unnatural
once i noticed this small dolly zoom i
started seeing it again
and again and again one of in my opinion
best uses of this is during the opening
when the parents are moving into the
house
they are one of the five daughters finds
a music box by a tree
after playing with it for a few seconds
she runs back to the house
then you can once again see this dolly
zoom taking effect
even though the tree remains roughly the
same size the house grows much bigger
this weird feeling from the effect
already tells us that something is wrong
with the house even though nothing has
happened yet there's an underlying
feeling of suspense in what should be a
very normal moment
now these dolly zooms they're really
really subtle
unlike in jaws or lord of the rings you
can barely see them
and i don't even think you're supposed
to notice them and that's a great idea
because it kind of puts us in the shoes
of the family they can sense that
something is off about this place
they don't quite know what it is but
they can all feel it's there
anyways all of this subconsciously
builds an uneasy tone without a single
jump scare and i like that these tricks
are used very sparingly
they are safe for the moments where they
really count when people are in a
conversation or revealing new
information
the movement is very straightforward
allowing the performances to take center
stage instead of off-putting visuals but
when there is a transition like somebody
just driving to a house or the last few
seconds in a scene that indicate that
the moment is done
the motion is cleverly used to not waste
any time and still convey
meaningful information and parts that
would otherwise be empty
but while the dolly zooms convey an
eerie atmosphere it's the scares that
truly build the fear
and a lot of the earlier ones have an
interesting execution and are very
imaginative but there's something unique
that the jump scares do that makes them
stand out from what you'd usually see
for example during one of the first
nights of the parent family is sleeping
in their new home
the mother is lured into the basement
where the demon traps her
she walks down the stairs sees that
nothing is there and then decides that
she wants to go back to bed
however the door is slammed in her face
and the lights turn off
she quickly lights a match and backs up
towards the door while looking down in
the cellar then from behind her
two hands appear and clap this is not
just a random scary moment but during
the first scenes we saw that the kids
frequently play a game called hide and
clap
where everyone hides in the house and
one blindfolded seeker needs to find out
where they are
by asking the others to clap and when
the mom plays a round with one of the
kids
we see the demon joining in on the fun
give me the third clap
so when carolyn sees the hands clapping
in the basement it shows how evil the
spirit really is
it taunts them probably just for fun by
referencing their game
also there's a cool switch because we
think that if anything's gonna happen
it's gonna come from downstairs because
that's where the mother is looking and
she's backed up towards the door
but then it comes from behind her
instead which is a big surprise
and james 1 is really good at making his
jump scares unexpected he carefully gets
you to focus in on one thing
and then makes this scary stuff come
from somewhere else we experienced
something similar when two other kids
find a witch on the wardrobe
this is the same closet we saw the hands
coming out of and clapping
and at an earlier point we also saw one
of the kids banging her head against the
doors
we are being led to believe that
something is wrong with it this shows us
that the scary moments aren't just
events that happen in one single scene
like you would expect in any other
horror film but they're slowly built up
throughout their story
that way they're a bit more meaningful
as soon as we see the wardrobe we have
this eerie feeling that something bad
can happen
any second on top of that there is once
again some very clever misdirection
going on because we're constantly shown
that there might be something
inside the closet this low angle also
cleverly conceals the top so that it's
completely out of her mind
this makes the scare jump out a lot more
when it's revealed that she's on top
but all of those things wouldn't really
matter if we don't feel immersed in the
setting and this leads into something
else that you'll see in the conjuring
that you won't see too often in horror
films or films in general
now one thing that can easily break the
tension during a scary scene
is cutting away from the action and
constantly changing angles
sure this is necessary to some degree
and it doesn't make it bad
but the conjuring uses a lot of long
takes so we feel much more connected to
the events
one of these shots comes when the mother
hears some noises in the house and
checks on all the kids
once she realizes they're all sleeping
she hears a loud crashing sound and sees
that all the family pictures are being
knocked over
she goes downstairs and hears subtle
sounds coming from all the different
rooms
and during this part we're constantly
locked onto her and we don't cut away
for a long time
the average length of each shot in
modern movies is about two and a half
seconds
but this moment goes on for more than
30. no matter where the mother goes
we're locked on her
and can't escape this moment we're
trapped in this room with her
it makes it feel like the events are
merely being documented like we're
following her around
another great use of the long takes and
probably my favorite one
is when the warrens enter the house and
investigate the basement
during the scene a police officer is
recording the events and we see the
entire thing
in the perspective of this old camera
this once again doesn't make it feel
like a cinematic moment
it looks more like we're witnessing real
archival footage
that combined with the very few cuts
gives it this feeling that what's going
on
is really happening also during these
long takes in the basement
the motions almost seem like they're
completely improvised and unplanned
which makes it look more believable
however looking past the long takes
there's perhaps even a simpler trick
that's really off-putting which does a
great job of making us feel
uncomfortable
let's take a look at one of the first
times that the kids believe they can
sense an evil spirit nearby
when we move up instead of cutting to
this shot we do a full 180 degree
rotation this does two things as we've
already talked about
it makes the shot longer which draws us
into the scene but more importantly it
gives us this feeling of
uneasiness a little bit of
disorientation and discomfort
which helps us get into christine's
shoes rolls are really uncommon
because they're extremely unnatural
maybe you guys see them more often but
it's pretty rare that i see one
usually most of the movement is
something we're comfortable with up down
left right
just like we move our heads but rolls
feel really bizarre
and it's used at the perfect time that's
what's great about the conjuring it
doesn't cheat you or set up false
expectations when there's a move that
already makes you feel pretty weird
it's there for a reason and gets you the
sense that something's off much like how
the characters can just feel it
when things aren't right we see
something similar when caroline gets
locked in the basement by the demon
here it's not quite as extreme and it
happens after the scary moment but we're
still significantly tilted which again
underlines how off the events in the
house are
perhaps the most intense use of this
comes towards the end of the movie when
caroline becomes possessed
the warrens drive to the house and see
her struggling in the cellar
they then realize that she's in need of
an exorcism but for that
ed needs his bible which lorraine
quickly gets from the car when she walks
outside
the camera is rotated so much that
things are literally upside down
lorraine comes out of the basement where
some really twisted things are about to
happen
there we are flipped but when she walks
out of it and out of the house towards
safety
we're upright when she comes back and
goes downstairs we flip over once again
to really drive it home that the events
that are about to happen in the cellar
are not right
but let's get to the easiest method used
to creep you out before anything
deliberately scary even happens this is
something that's actually a little bit
more
normal i guess you would say i mean
dolly zooms are supposed to make you
uncomfortable and rolls are almost
completely avoided because of their
disorienting effect but there's a
technique that's really common that
still unsettles you because of the way
it's used so i remember when i first
watched the conjuring that some moments
even though there were no tricks still
look kind of strange like there is this
moment when all but one of the kids go
off to school
and the mother is home alone with her
youngest child
cindy you have your lunch
it looks very unusual and this time it's
because of a really
long zoom now when you want to get in
closer to the action you basically have
two options
you can push in or zoom in pushing in
feels very natural since it just feels
like we're slowly being put closer to
whatever's happening
but zooming in feels a little bit
different since everything is magnified
whereas during a push-in the background
looks more or less the same with only
the foreground getting bigger
but normally these zooms would be much
more subtle and this to me is even
stranger than the dolly zooms because
that effect is really well documented
yet zooms should seem very standard but
it's how they're used that make them
seem
weird they're always a little faster and
going slightly tighter than you would
expect
again this fits well because these
unnatural zooms are usually followed by
something that's significant and creepy
like one of the first times we get this
it's followed by the youngest daughter
finding the mysterious music box and
this is an important part of the story
come on april mom wants us inside
look what i found cindy
so the eerie long zooms complement the
plot nicely and underline the strange
nature of the events
and they might just be used because it's
easier and less time consuming to zoom
in instead of pushing in but that
wouldn't really explain why they're so
long probably my favorite use of this
and the last example i'll give
is the first shot of the parent family
arriving at the house we again get this
long
zoom that lasts almost 20 seconds and
goes in really tight
here it's a little bit harder to tell
since the camera starts off
being pushed and then begins to zoom the
overly long zooms once again lets us
know
that something about what's going on is
not right even though it's just a family
moving into a house but there's
something else that i think specifically
makes this opening shot a lot scarier
because i think and this is just my
interpretation but i think that this is
supposed to be the point of view of the
demon
the movie uses quite a few point of view
shots that look pretty much
exactly like this but they're always
reserved for when we're seeing what one
of the characters is looking at
one example of this is when the mother
walks down a hallway and notices her
child talking to someone who isn't there
it's a great use of changing their
perspective since we get exactly what
the character sees
and especially during a mysterious or
tense moment we get the information
of what's happening just as the person
we're following is so something scary
were to jump out at one of our
protagonists
it jumps at us as well now these two
moments the opening shot of the family
moving in
and the mother walking down the hall
they feel identical making me think that
the opening shot is supposed to feel
like the ghost slowly walking up to the
window
and then focusing in on the new victims
moving into the house
now regardless if that's true or not
these carefully chosen point of view
shots really help make certain moments
even scarier towards the beginning for
example we're following roger as he's
walking around the house late at night
as one of the doors suddenly opens by
itself
he slowly walks towards it to see what's
going on during this scene we switch to
the point of view shot that no longer
makes it feel like we're watching what's
happening but instead we're a part of it
so these are some of the hidden
techniques in the conjuring that are
used to make it more suspenseful
dolly zooms for uneasiness zooms for the
anticipation of something strange
point of view shots for suspense and
sympathy long takes for immersion
and rotation for disorientation it's
this break away from standard shots that
constantly gives the story a fresh
feeling even though we're in the same
location
since we always get a new perspective on
the same rooms
thank you so much for watching i hope
you enjoyed it and that i get to see you
guys in the next video
bye guys